ACL Overview
===========
ACLs, known for their ability to filter traffic as it either comes into or leaves an interface, can also be used for other purposes, including restricting remote access (virtual type terminal, or VTY) to an IOS device, filtering routing information, prioritizing traffic with queuing, triggering phone calls with dial-on-demand routing (DDR), changing the administrative distance of routes, and specifying traffic to be
protected by an IPSec VPN, among many others. This chapter focuses on restricting the flow of traffic to or through a router.

Definition
ACLs are basically a set of commands, grouped together by a number or name, that
are used to filter traffic entering or leaving an interface. ACL commands define
specifically which traffic is permitted and denied. ACLs are created in Global
Configuration mode.

Once you create your group of ACL statements, you must activate them. For
filtering traffic between interfaces, the ACL is activated in Interface Subconfiguration mode. This can be a physical interface, such as ethernet0 or serial0, or a logical interface, such as ethernet0.1 or serial0.1. When activating an ACL on an interface, you must specify in which direction the traffic should be filtered:
■ Inbound (as the traffic comes into an interface from an external source)
■ Outbound (before the traffic exits an interface to the network)
With inbound ACLs, the IOS compares the packet to the interface ACL before the
IOS forwards it to another interface. With outbound ACLs, the packet is received on
an interface and forwarded to the exit interface; the IOS then compares the packet to
the ACL.
One restriction that ACLs have is that they cannot filter traffic that the router
itself originates. For example, if you execute a ping or traceroute from the router,
or if you telnet from the router to another device, ACLs applied to the router’s
interfaces cannot filter these connections outbound. However, if an external device
tries to ping, traceroute, or telnet to the router or through the router to a remote
destination, the router can filter these packets.

For inbound ACLs, the ACL
is processed before any further processing
by the IOS; with outbound ACLs, the packet
is routed to the interface and then the
outbound ACL is processed. ACLs applied
outbound to interfaces cannot be used to
filter traffic the IOS originates itself.

Filtered Information Standard IP ACL 	Extended IP ACL
Source address		Yes 			Yes
Destination address 	No 			Yes
IP protocol (i.e., TCP or UDP) No 		Yes
Protocol information (i.e., port number) No	 Yes

Processing

ACLs are basically statements that are grouped together by either a name or number.
Within this group of statements, when a packet is processed by an ACL, the IOS will
go through certain steps in finding a match against the ACL statements. ACLs are
processed top-down by the IOS. Using a top-down approach, a packet is compared to
the first statement in the ACL, and if the IOS finds a match between the packet and
the statement, the IOS will execute one of two actions included with the statement:
permit or deny.
If the IOS doesn’t find a match of packet contents to the first ACL statement,
the IOS will proceed to the next statement in the list, again going through the same
matching process. If the second statement matches the packet contents, the IOS
executes one of the two actions. If there is no match on this statement, the IOS will
keep on going through the list until it finds a match. If the IOS goes through the
entire list and doesn’t find a match in the ACL statements to the ACL contents,
the router will drop the packet. The top-down processing of ACLs brings out the
following very important points:
■ Once a match is found, no further statements are processed in the list.
■ The order of statements is important, since after the first match, the rest of
the statements are not processed.
■ If no match is found in the list, the packet is dropped.

Implicit Deny
Another important aspect of the top-down process is that if the router compares a
packet to every statement in the list and does not find a match against the packet
contents, the router will drop the packet. This process is referred to as implicit deny.
At the end of every ACL is an invisible statement that drops all traffic that doesn’t
match any of the preceding statements in the ACL. Given this process, it makes no
sense to have a list of only deny statements, since the implicit deny drops all traffic
anyway. Therefore, every ACL should have at least one permit statement; otherwise,
an ACL with only deny statements will drop all traffic, given the deny statements
and the hidden implicit deny statement.

Important Configuration Guidelines
Configuring an ACL is not a simple process. To get the configuration process right,
you should be guided by the following list:
■ Order of statements is important: Put the most restrictive statements at the
top of the list and the least restrictive at the bottom.
■ ACL statements are processed top-down until a match is found, and then no
more statements in the list are processed.
■ If no match is found in the ACL, the packet is dropped (implicit deny).
■ Each grouping of ACL statements needs either a unique number or a unique
name.
■ The router cannot filter traffic that it, itself, originates.
■ Only one IP ACL can be applied to an interface in each direction (inbound
and outbound)—two or more ACLs cannot be applied inbound or outbound
to the same interface. (Actually, one ACL for each protocol, such as IP and
IPX, can be applied to an interface in each direction.)

Applying an empty ACL to an interface permits all traffic by default: in order
for an ACL to have an implicit deny statement, you need at least one actual
permit or deny statement in the ACL.

ACL Type ACL Numbers
IP Standard 1–99, 1300–1999
IP Extended 100–199, 2000–2699

Activating an ACL

At the end of the ip access-group command, you must specify which ACL
you are activating and in which direction:
■ in As traffic comes into the interface
■ out As traffic leaves the interface


Standard Numbered ACLs
Standard IP ACLs are simple and easy to configure. First, standard IP ACLs filter on
only the source IP address in an IP packet. Use the following command to create an
entry in a standard numbered IP ACL:
Router(config)# access-list 1-99|1300-1999 permit|deny
source_IP_address
[wildcard_mask] [log]
With a standard numbered IP ACL, you can use list numbers of 1–99 and 1300–
1999. Following this is the action the router should take if there is a match on the
condition. The condition is based solely on the source IP address. You enter this
followed by an optional wildcard mask. If you omit the mask, it defaults to 0.0.0.0—
an exact match is required in order to execute the action.



Extended Numbered ACLs
Extended IP ACLs are much more flexible in what you can match on than standard
ACLs. Extended ACLs can match on all of the following information:
■ Source and destination IP addresses
■ TCP/IP protocol (IP, TCP, UDP, ICMP, and so on)
■ Protocol information, such as port numbers for TCP and UDP, or message
types for ICMP

Operators With TCP and UDP, you can specify the source, destination, or both
source and destination port numbers or names. To specify how to perform the match,
you must configure an operator. The operator tells the router how to match on the
port number(s) or names. Table 22-5 lists the valid operators for TCP and UDP
ACL entries. Note that these operators apply only to TCP and UDP connections.
Other IP protocols do not use them. If you omit the port number or name, the ACL
looks for a match on all TCP or UDP connections.


Ports Numbers and Names For TCP and UDP connections, you can list
either the name or the number of the port. For example, if you wanted to match
on telnet traffic, you could use either the keyword telnet or the number 23.
Table 22-6 lists some of the most common port names and numbers for TCP
connections.

Operator 		Explanation
lt 			Less than
gt 			Greater than
neq 			Not equal to
eq 			Equal to
range 			Range of port numbers

Port Name Command Parameter Port Number
FTP 	Data 	ftp-data 	20
FTP 	Control ftp 		21
Telnet 	telnet 			23
SMTP 	smtp 			25
WWW 	www 			80
POP3 	pop3 			110

Port Name Command Parameter Port Number
DNS 	Query 	dns 	53
TFTP 	tftp 		69
SNMP 	snmp 		161
IP 	RIP 	rip 	520


ACL Placement
This section covers design issues with ACLs—that is, where you should place
ACLs of a given type (standard or extended). In other words, given the source and
destination that you are filtering, on what router and what interface on that router
should you activate your ACL? This section covers some of the important points you
should consider when determining where to put your ACLs.
First, don’t go crazy with ACLs and create dozens and dozens of them across all
of your routers. This makes testing and troubleshooting your filtering rules almost
impossible. In a campus network, for example, ACL configuration and filtering is
on the layer 3 switch or router at the distribution layer that connects a building or
floor to the campus backbone. This model was discussed in Chapter 14: the core,
distribution, and access layers.
The second point is that you will want to limit the number of statements in
your ACL. An ACL with hundreds of statements is almost impossible to test
and troubleshoot. It’s not unusual to see an ACL have a lot of unnecessary and
overlapping commands that have been carried over from years past.
As to where you should place your ACLs, the following two rules hold true in
most situations:
■ Standard ACLs should be placed as close to
the destination devices as possible.
■ Extended ACLs should be placed as close to
the source devices as possible.

