Address Translation
=====================
A second standard, RFC 1631, was created to solve this problem. It defines a processcalled Network Address Translation (NAT), which allows you to change an IP address in a packet to a different address. When communicating to devices in a public
network, your device needs to use a source address that is a public address. Address translation allows you to translate your internal private addresses to public addresses before these packets leave your network.


Here are some common reasons that you might need to employ address translation:

■ You have to use private addressing because your ISP didn’t assign you enough public IPv4 addresses.

■ You are using public addresses but have changed ISPs, and your new ISP
won’t support these public addresses.

■ You are merging two companies and they are using the same address space—for instance, 10.0.0.0—which creates routing and reachability issues.

■ You want to assign the same IP address to multiple machines so that users on the Internet see this offered service as a single
logical computer.


Term Definition

Inside 		Addresses located on the inside of your network
Outside 	Addresses located outside of your network
Local 		The IP address physically assigned to a device
Global 		The public IP address physically or logically assigned to 		a device
Inside 		local IP address An inside device with an assigned private 		IP address
Inside 		global IP address An inside device with a registered 		public IP address
Outside 	global IP address An outside device with a registered 		public IP address
Outside 	local IP address An outside device with an assigned 		private IP address


Static NAT
With static NAT, a manual translation is performed by an address translation
device, translating one IP address to a different one. Typically, static NAT is used to
translate destination IP addresses in packets as they come into your network, but you
can translate source addresses also.


Dynamic NAT
With static address translation, you need to build the translations manually. If you
have 1000 devices, you need to create 1000 static entries in the address translation
table, which is a lot of work. Typically, static translation is done for inside resources
that outside people want to access. When inside users access outside resources,
dynamic translation is typically used. In this situation, the global address assigned to
the internal user isn’t that important, since outside devices don’t directly connect to
your internal users—they just return traffic to them that the inside user requested.
With dynamic NAT, you must manually define two sets of addresses on your
address translation device. One set defines which inside addresses are allowed to
be translated (the local addresses), and the other defines what these addresses
are to be translated to (the global addresses). When an inside user sends traffic
through the address translation device, say a router, it examines the source IP
address and compares it to the internal local address pool. If it finds a match, then it
determines which inside global address pool it should use for the translation. It then
dynamically picks an address in the global address pool that is not currently assigned
to an inside device. The router adds this entry in its address translation table, the
packet is translated, and the packet is then sent to the outside world. If no matching
entry is found in the local address pool, the address is not translated and is forwarded
to the outside world in its original state.

Port Address Translation
One problem with static or dynamic NAT is that it provides only a one-to-one
address translation. Therefore, if you have 5000 internal devices with private
addresses, and all 5000 devices try to reach the Internet simultaneously, you need
5000 public addresses in your inside global address pool. If you have only 1000
public addresses, only the first 1000 devices are translated and the remaining 4000
won’t be able to reach outside destinations. To overcome this problem, you can use a
process called address overloading. Many other terms are used to describe this process,
including port address translation (PAT) and network address port translation
(NAPT).

Advantages of Address Translation*************
As mentioned at the beginning of this part of the chapter, address translation
devices are typically used to give you an almost inexhaustible number of addresses
as well as to hide your internal network addressing scheme. Another advantage of
address translation is that if you change ISPs or merge with another company, you
can keep your current addressing scheme and make any necessary changes on your
address translation device or devices, making your address management easier.
Another big advantage that address translation provides is that it gives you
tighter control over traffic entering and leaving your network. For example, if you
are using private addresses internally, all traffic entering and leaving must pass
through an address translation device. Because of this restriction, it is much easier to
implement your security and business policies

Disadvantages of Address Translation************
Even though address translation solves many problems and has many advantages,
it also has its share of disadvantages. Here are the three main issues with address
translation:
■ Each connection has an added delay.
■ Troubleshooting is more difficult.
■ Not all applications work with address translation.

